The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Feather Bed, by Robert Graves


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Feather Bed


Author: Robert Graves



Release Date: June 12, 2019  [eBook #59742]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FEATHER BED***


E-text prepared by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/featherbed00grav





THE FEATHER BED

by

ROBERT GRAVES

With a cover design by William Nicholson






Printed and Published by
Leonard & Virginia Woolf
at the Hogarth Press
Hogarth House Richmond
1923




_INTRODUCTORY LETTER_




INTRODUCTORY LETTER TO JOHN RANSOME, THE AMERICAN POET.


My dear Ransome,

Will you accept the dedication of this poem which seems naturally
yours? It was more than a year writing without losing much of the
excitement of the original scheme, but when on the cooling of inspiration
constructional flaws appeared, these proved to be beyond help of riveting
and surface tinkering, so the edition is small and very few review
copies will go out. Still the poem is a necessary signpost to those
friends of mine who have found the change between the two halves of my
recent collection of lyrics, _Whipperginny_, inexplicably abrupt: and
though dissatisfied I am not ashamed. It would be as well, from other
considerations altogether, not to let the honest burghers of Nashville,
Tenn., already scandalized by your _Poems about God_, see a copy of the
_Feather-bed_: but if this should happen and they demand an explanation,
tell them that I have no anticonstitutional intentions. Explain that
it is a study of a fatigued mind in a fatigued body and under the
stress of an abnormal conflict, that they can read it, if they will,
as a cautionary tale after the style of John Bunyan’s unregenerate _Mr
Badman_, only that Badman was unregenerate (wasn’t he?) to the last,
while I leave my young man in the throes of nightmare. Assure them that
neither does the author nor in a more normal mood would the hero of the
poem himself imagine convent life to be what it here seems to be; but
that the staggering rebuff to the young man’s typical bullying attitude
in love leads him to invent this monstrous libel in compensation; which
libel is merely flattery to his own wounded pride.

The psychological interest of the piece for me, now I have finished, is
in the way that the logical argument broken by circlings of associative
thought, all however relevant to the emotional disturbance, is
continually being caught up again with an effort by the drowsy intellect.
When at last the sour grapes idea, with its accompanying fantastics, has
determined a reasonable and apparently final decision of rupture both
with the girl herself and with the traditional religion she represents,
the effort relaxes and the mind is overborne in sleep by nightmares, its
revolutionary enthusiasm flattened by the reaction of tradition. The
Morning Star theme is an interpolation by the outside Orator to stabilize
the drama which without some such solution comes dangerously near a
manifesto of atheism.

When you visit us in England I want to talk to you about Lucifer
and explain how I had been reading the Old and New Testaments while
writing this poem. Briefly in this way, as a record of the progressive
understanding of God throughout the ages by a single representative race,
the Jews. God is presented in three degrees at least. There is God the
creator of the race of man, but of man still animal of the animals, whose
daughters the sons of Adam found fair; let us call that God, Saturn. Then
there is Jehovah or Jove, Saturn’s successor: the Garden of Eden is the
perfect symbolic expression of the birth of Jehovah. It is more than a
fable of the dawn of sex consciousness, it dramatizes man’s recognition
of the end of a long biological phase, and the birth pangs of the new
experimental period called civilization. The old heritage of self-seeking
instinct, in conflict with a new principle of social order found
necessary for the further survival of the race, split the primitive idea
of God into two, the ideas of Good and Evil, Good being the approval by
the social mind of those non-conscious workings of the body which further
its aims, Evil being the condemnation of the old Adam inclinations which
run counter to it. This idea of Good then is Jehovah, the God of the
present, predominantly male, violent, blundering, deceitful, with great
insistence on uniformity of rites duties and taboos, at whatever cost to
the individual; Jehovah’s greatest champion I found in Moses.

Finally there is Lucifer, the God of the future, only a weakling as yet,
the hope of eventual adjustment between ancient habits and present needs.
As the spirit of reconciliation, Lucifer puts out of date the negative
virtue of Good fighting with Evil, and proposes an Absolute Good which we
can now conceive of as Peace.

The doctrine of mutual responsibility for error, and of mutual respect
between individuals, sexes, classes, groups, and nations, a higher
conception than the eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth doctrine
of Jehovah, is Lucifer’s. This ideal anarchy is the aspect of God
momentarily seen, I thought, by Jesus Christ, before him prophesied
by Isaiah and before him by Melchizedek; but since fallen even among
Christians under the renewed tyranny of Jehovah. The story of Lucifer’s
fall is clearly written in the Acts of the Apostles; where the violence
of Moses towards the man who gathered sticks on the Sabbath Day is
worthily imitated by Peter when he strikes dead Ananias and Sapphira for
a partial witholding of a voluntary gift; where the low cunning of Jacob
with Esau is matched by Paul’s stirring up the partizanship of Saducee
against Pharisee while preaching the doctrine of tolerance.

This Light-Bringer Lucifer has been persistently misidentified by the
priests of Jehovah with the spirit of Evil, their God’s arch-enemy. But
I would have it put like this: if John Milton had paused to enquire why
Jesus Christ promised his followers the Morning Star as a reward for
virtue, Milton would have been spared the compunction which certainly
was besetting him in Paradise Lost for having conceived of his Prince of
Darkness as so much of a gentleman.

One day I must give you the full history of the famous encounter between
the archangel Michael and Lucifer (outlined in the Epistle of Jude) when
Lucifer asked the riddle still current in English speaking nurseries and
Michael dared not answer or even curse him, because an open discussion of
this particular point might prove dangerous to the fortunes of Jehovah.
In the _Revelations_ chapter which provides the familiar lesson for All
Saints’ Day we hear that Michael had to admit the implied charge by
resorting to violence. But guess the riddle and you shall have the answer
given you; this is the proper course communication should take between
poets.

                     And so yours in all good will,

                                                           ROBERT GRAVES.

_Islip, Oxon. August, 1922._




_THE FEATHER BED_




THE FEATHER BED

PROLOGUE


    In sudden cloud that blotting distance out
    Confused the compass of the traveller’s mind,
    Biassed his course, three times from the hill’s crest
    Trying to descend but with no track to follow,
    Nor visible landmark—three times he had struck
    The same sedged pool of steaming desolation,
    The same black monolith rearing up before it.
    This third time then he paused to recognize
    The _Witches’ Cauldron_ only known before
    By hearsay, fly-like on whose rim he had crawled
    Three times and three times dipped to climb again
    Its uncouth sides, so to go crawling on.

    By falls of scree, moss-mantled slippery rock,
    Wet bracken, drunken gurgling watercourses,
    He escaped limping at last, and broke the circuit
    Travelling down and down; but smooth descent
    Interrupted by new lakes and ridges,
    Sprawling unmortared walls of boulder granite,
    Marshes; one arm hung bruised where he had fallen,
    Blood welled a sticky trickle from his cheek,
    Mist gathering in his eye-brows ran full beads
    Down to his eyes, making them smart and blur.

    At last he blundered on some shepherd’s hut—
    He thought, the hut took pity and appeared—
    With mounds of peat and welcome track of wheels
    Which he now followed to a broad green road
    Running from right to left; but still at fault
    Whether he stood this side or that of the hill,
    The mist being still on all, with little pause
    He chose the easier way, the downward way.
    Legs were dog-tired already, only the road,
    The slow descent with some relief of guidance
    Maintained his shambling five miles to the hour
    Coloured with day dreams. Then a finger post
    Broke through the mist, pointing into his face,
    But when he stopped to read gave him no comfort.
    SEVENTEEN MILES TO—somewhere, God knows what!
    The paint was weathered to a mere acrostic
    Which cold unfocussed eyes could never read—
    But jerking a derisive thumb behind it
    Up a rough stream-wet path “THE WITCHES’ CAULDRON
    ONE MILE.” Only a mile
    For two good hours of stumbling steeplechase!
    There was a dead snake by some humorous hand
    Twined on the pointing finger; far away
    A bull roared hoarsely, but all else was mist.

    Then anger came upon him, in which heat
    He fell into deep thought and rhymes came strung
    Faster than speech might have kept pace with them.
    The Snake, the Bull!
                        What laughter was it, ended
    His allegory and startled the graceful hare
    That secure in the mist came leaping down towards him?
    Witch in disguise, emissary of witches?
    Swiftly he takes a stone up, hurls it at her,
    Chases her, bawling childish angry threats;
    She screams. Now with red shame sorrow floods back
    Making his journey by twice three miles longer
    As though once revisiting the witches,
    Those unclean—it stood symbol in his mind
    For what, but what? He never wished her harm—
    She being a hare and having innocent eyes—
    It was her fault for blundering on him there.
    He never wished her harm, she should have known
    His angry fit, frustration, weariness
    Breaking a gentler mood. With slackening steps
    He once more takes the homeward road, that is,
    If it does lead home; it’s making uphill now
    And narrowing sadly. That fool finger-post
    Had only snakes to brag about and witches,
    And the bull roared no very helpful threat.




THE FEATHER BED


    “Goodbye, but now forget all that we were
    Or said, or did to each other, here’s goodbye.
    Send no more letters now, only forget
    We ever met....” and the letter maunders on
    In the unformed uncompromising hand
    That witnesses against her, yet provides
    Extenuation and a grudging praise.
    Rachel to be a nun! Postulate now
    For her noviciate in a red brick convent:
    Praying, studying, wearing uniform,
    She serves the times of a tyrannic bell,
    Rising to praise God in the early hours
    With atmosphere of filters and stone stairs,
    Distemper, crucifixes and red drugget,
    Dusty hot-water pipes, a legacy-library....

    Sleep never comes to me so tired as now
    Leg-chafed and footsore with my mind in a blaze
    Troubling this problem over, vexing whether
    To beat Love down with ridicule or instead
    To disregard new soundings and still keep
    The old course by the uncorrected chart,
    (The faithful lover, his unchanging heart)
    Rachel, before goodbye
    Obscures you in your sulky resignation
    Come now and stand out clear in mind’s eye
    Giving account of what you were to me
    And what I was to you and how and why,
    Saying after me, if you can say it, “I loved.”

    Rachel so summoned answers thoughtfully
    But painfully, turning away her head,
    “I lived and thought I loved, for I had gifts
    Of most misleading, more than usual beauty,
    Dark hair, grey eyes, capable fingers, movement
    Graceful and certain; my slow puzzled smile
    Accusing of too much ingenuousness
    Yet offered more than I could hope to achieve,
    And if I thought I loved, no man would doubt it.”
    So speaks the image as I read her mind,
    Or is it my pride speaks on her behalf,
    Ventriloquizing to deceive myself?
    Anger, grief, jealousy, shame confuse the issue,
    Her beauty is a truth I can not blink
    However angry, jealous, sad, ashamed.

    Dissolve, image, dissolve!
    Make no appeal to the hunter in my nature,
    Leave me to self-reproach in my own time;
    If I too promised more than you could meet,
    Your beauty overrode my sense of fate
    And fitness, with extravagant pretence.
    Is it true that we were lovers once, or nearly?
    Lovers should sleep together on one pillow
    Clasped in each others arms with lip to lip,
    Their bed should be a masterpiece of ease,
    A mother-of-pearl embrace for its twin pearls.
    But where do you sleep now, and where am I?
    Disdaining all the comforts of old use
    We fall apart, are made ridiculous.
    You in your cell toss miserably enough
    Under thin blankets on a springless couch,
    And I two hundred miles away or further
    Wallow in this feather bed,
    With nothing else to rest my gaze upon
    Than flowery wall-paper, bulging and stained,
    And two stern cardboard signals “_God is love_,” and
    “_I was a stranger and ye took Me in_,”
    Ye took me in, took me in, took me in, ...
    The train of my thought straggles, loses touch,
    Piles in confusion, takes the longer road,
    Runs anyhow, heads true only by chance.
    Sacred Carnivals trundle through my mind,
    With Rhyme-compulsion mottoing each waggon.
    _God’s Love_, _the Holy Dove_, and _Heaven above_
    _Sin_, _deadly Sin_, _Begin_, _the Fight to Win_
    _Ye took me in_; _inn_; _inn_;—and now a jolt
    Returns me consciousness, and weary Logic
    Gathers her snapped threads up. A mouldy inn
    Offensive with cockchafers, sour and musty,
    All night the signboard creaks and the blinds bang,
    The cupboards groan, the draught under the door
    Flurries the carpets of this inn, this inn.
    How I came here? Where else could I be bettered?
    Loneliness drew me here and cloudy weather
    With cold Spring rains to chill me through and through
    Pelting across the mountains, purging away
    Affection for a fault, restoring faith....
    So God is Love? Admitted; still the thought
    Is Dead Sea fruit to angry baffled lovers
    Lying sleepless and alone in double beds,
    Shaken in mind, harassed with hot blood fancies.
    Break the ideal, and the animal’s left
    Which this ideal stood as mask to hide.
    Then the hot blood with no law hindering it
    Drums and buffets suddenly at the heart
    And seeks a vent with what lies first to hand.

    But yet no earthbound evil spirit comes
    Taking advantage of my unwrought mind,
    Tempting me to a gay concubinage,
    In likeness of some ancient queen of heaven
    Ardent and ever young. The legends say
    They come to hermits so, and holy saints,
    Disguised in a most blinding loveliness;
    Disrobe about the good man’s bed and twitch
    His blankets off and make as if to kiss him
    With sighs of passion irresistibly sweet.
    Yet he has power to turn on them, to cry
    “In the name of Christ begone!” and go they must.
    If I were a hermit now—but being myself
    I never give them challenge, never bend
    Kneeling at my bedside for hours together
    Praying aloud for chastity—that’s the bait
    Certain to draw them from their shadowy caves,
    Their broken shrines and rockbound fastnesses—
    Praying against the World, the Flesh, the Devil,
    But pausing most on Flesh—that praying against,
    Proposing yet denying the fixed wish!
    Closest expressed it’s the most dangerous....

    How would I _say my prayers_ now, if I tried,
    Using what formula? Would instinct turn
    To
            Gentle Jesus meek and mild
            Look upon thy little child
    To Gentle Jesus and the entrancing picture
    Of _Pretty mice in Plicity_ (where alas,
    Is County Plicity now? Beyond what skyline?
    I climbed in vain to-day).... When Rachel prays,
    Does she still dreamily speak to Gentle Jesus,
    The shepherd in that Nurnberg oleograph
    Hanging above the nursery mantlepiece?
    Her God? Anthropomorphic surely. One
    Bearded like Moses, straddled on the clouds,
    Armed with thunderbolts and shaggy eyebrows.
    “Bless me, dear God, and make me a good child.”
    Her childishness obscures her womanhood.
    When was I ever conscious in her presence
    That she was bodily formed like other women
    With womb for bearing and with breasts for suckling,
    With power, when she desired, to rouse in me
    By but the slightest art in diminution
    Of her accustomed childish truthfulness,
    A word or gesture hinting doubtfulness,
    The angry stream flooding beyond restraint?
    And yet no frisky wraith has come to-night
    Assuming Rachel’s body, goading me
    With false presentment of her honest person
    To mutiny and to utter overthrow;
    No wanton Venus, no bold Helen of Troy.

    For look, a different play performs to-night!
    See how come crowding in, with a bold air
    Of pertinence I do not dare to question
    This odd rag-tag-and-bobtail of lost souls,
    Ecclesiastical, furtive, dim, far gone
    In their _dementia praecox_! Doctor Hornblow
    On the Pentateuch, Dean Dogma upon Ruth
    (Ay, Ruth; the alien corn was not the worst)
    Keble and Pusey, Moody and Sankey griddling,
    And one most strange Victorian apparition,
    The ghost of Gladstone, with his stickout collars,
    Goes hand in hand with Senor Monkey-brand,
    Comrades who, printed on a paper cover,
    Gladstone in front and Monkey on the back,
    Made the _Impregnable Rock of Holy Scripture_
    Tacit defence of Darwin’s blasphemies.
    There go the ghosts of Mason, Martin Tupper,
    Dean Farrar, South, Cautionary Mrs. Turner,
    Butterfield with a spotted senior clerk,
    And a long rabble of confusing figures,
    Nuns, deacons, theologians, commentators,
    Spikes in birettas, missionaries like apes
    Hairy and chattering, bald; with, everyone,
    A book in the left hand tight clasped, the right
    Free to point scorn.
                        My cauliflower-wicked candle
    Gutters and splutters on the chair beside me,
    Over two books and a letter; the crowd passing
    Groans for reproach, confident in their numbers.
    But I, long used to crowds and their cowardly ways,
    Return these insults with the cold set eye
    That break their corporate pride—
                        What? those are plays.
    Yes, dramas by John Ford—_Love’s Sacrifice_,
    _The Broken Heart_, _’Tis Pity she’s a Whore_.
    The titles shock? These things are “not convenient?”
    Well, try this other by (ah) Canon Trout,
    _The Wisest Course of Love_—why do you smile?
    The book of plays I bought, this was a present,
    Sent me with Rachel’s letter—but you smile,
    You’re smiling still? Then I apologize,
    Ladies and Lords. Indeed I never guessed
    Humour was a luxury you admitted.
    “’Tis pity she’s a ... postulant.” Is it that?
    Malicious hearts! but you still nod, laugh, point,
    Pointing what joke? _The Wisest Course of Love?_
    Yes?
      I don’t see. I’ll buy it for a forfeit.
    Then a red-haired beaky-nosed burly nun
    Called Sister Agatha, so I tell myself,
    Comes nearer, throws her veil aside, takes up
    The envelope of the letter. Now she lays
    A manicured finger on the office post-mark,
    Leering down in my face.
                            I see it now,
    You ugly she-bear. Wisest Course of Love
    Is _Maidenhead_? Then you have read the letter?
    Dictated it quite likely? You, then, you!
    I know you, nun-official set to guide
    The postulants through their long penances
    And stern soul-searchings—with the twisted grin
    Of a bawd mistress, none too well concealed,
    You greeted Rachel in the Convent Hall,
    And peered and saw that she was beautiful,
    Giving her welcome with a sisterly kiss.

    Mother Superior was quite satisfied
    After inquiry in Burke’s _Landed Gentry_
    That the newcomer was a suitable
    Candidate for the Order of Seven Sorrows.
    It’s _so important_ to have _ladies only_!
    You twirl dear Mother round a little finger;
    You know her weaknesses, emotionalism,
    Snobbery, love of ritual; quite content
    To let her have her way in formal matters
    If you may mould the spirit of the place
    By due control of youthful aspirants,
    Postulants and novices—with the glow
    Of great devotion, honesty itself,
    You teach them hatred of their woman-flesh
    Eying their bodies with flagellant gaze
    Approving shame’s rebellion. _Maidenhead!_
    A well spiced joke! The carnal maidenhead
    Untaken, but the maidenhead of spirit
    Stolen away. Rachel in your good care!

    She says three years’ probation. For three years
    Humiliation, then she takes the veil
    And goes for ever.... “But of course, dear Friend,
    (Where did she learn “Dear Friend?”)
    Should I discover when I search my heart
    That God has sealed me for some other life,
    That my intended vow of resignation
    Is only pride, why then I’m free again.
    I pray for you,” etc., and etc.
    Dear Friend? lover or nothing it must be.
    I’m tired of friends, I’m past the need of friends.

    We never talked religion till that day.
    I took for granted Rachel used her sense,
    Thought for herself without the aid of priests
    On spiritual matters: I? I never trouble
    About such talk one year’s end to the next,
    But one day argument began; she started
    On Christian meekness, the low slavish virtue
    “Tapeinophrosune”, obsequiousness,
    Which I called nonsense. “Nonsense?” (with wide eyes)
    “Or call it poetry. Christ was never meek.
    Let meekness crawl below in catacombs,
    Pride drives the money-changers with a scourge,
    Keeps silence to accusers, chooses death
    When an escape is more acceptable
    To justice than embarrassment of killing.
    I’m talking paradox? I never meant it.”
    (Here I grew nettled at her wooden look)
    “And as for ‘feeling Jesus in my heart’
    What _does_ that mean? explain!
    I might acknowledge that historically
    All generous action flows from the prime source
    Of Jesus’ teaching (though give Plato credit
    And Aristotle). But Jesus as a power
    Alive, praying, pleading like a ouija spirit,
    Or _Laughing Eyes_ the séance influence,
    That’s stupid and unnecessary, in my mind.
    I am a man, I am proud, Jesus was man and proud;
    He died fulfilling, and his soul found peace.
    I greet him friendly down the gulf of years.”
    “But no!” she said “There _is_ a Spirit of Jesus
    Say what you like, there _is_ a Spirit of Jesus.”
    So I allowed her that, changing my front
    Saying, “If Jesus died on Cross, He’s dead,
    In so far as Mary’s son, the prophet died
    But hardly was He dead,
    Than up this elemental demon sprang
    Assuming mastership of Jesus’ school
    Using his body, even, so it’s told
    Calling himself by name of _Jesus Risen_.
    Who was he? Some poor godling, fallen through pride
    And greed of human flesh, on evil days.
    He changed his heart and once more stood for power,
    A roaring lion in the white lamb’s fleece,
    So by a long campaign of self-abasement
    And self-effacement grown mob-strong at length
    He overturned high Heaven, now rules the world.
    Yes, he’s a powerful devil; we are his sons
    Got on she-furies of our Northern gales.
    We hate the inheritance entailed on us
    And the outlandish family coat we blazon,
    The tell-tale features also; would deny
    His fatherhood, but for that eye, that nose,
    Betraying Galilee our Father’s land.
    There’s no escape from him. Midwife Tradition
    Has knotted Jesus in our navel strings
    Never to be undone this side the grave.”
    But that was one stage worse than blasphemy.
    And when we parted, she smiled grudgingly.
    I had said too much and cut her to the quick.
    She thought, poor child, she had her choice to make
    Between God’s way and my way. And so she chose ...
    This letter ... But she writes of Christian love.
    What _is_ that? It’s a most annoying habit,
    A warm blood-teasing smile, an open look,
    A recognition—thinks I to myself,
    Boy, this is fine! Love at first sight! True love!
    But then the disillusionment—by God
    She turns the same look of those clear kind eyes
    On a bootblack, on some fool behind a counter.
    She calls that, Love? But what _is_ Love to me?
    Love; it’s a two-part game, I’d say, not merely
    The searching radiations from one eye,
    That fly about with indiscriminate force—
    Sometimes unthinking in a public place
    I stare at girls sitting sideface to me
    And wonder at their beauty, summing it up,
    Then being innocent girls (I’d never look
    At others so) they grow aware of the heat
    That pours out from my eyes; but do not see me.
    (I may be fifty feet away or more)
    They fidget in their seats, uncross their knees,
    Pull down their skirts to hide even their ankles,
    Blush furiously and gaze about, in trouble;
    Then I start guiltily, rise and walk away;
    But that’s not Love, the searching and the heat;
    Love is an act of God, akin to Faith,
    Call it the union of two prayers by Faith
    (Here we come back to prayer by a long circuit
    And back to “God is Love”)
    But to explain again what’s Faith, what’s prayer,
    That’s the teaser! much too hard for me.

    Still, these are not Christian monopolies.
    What’s Faith but power stripped of its ornaments,
    Grants, title-deeds and such like accidentals;
    Force won by disentangling from the mind
    All hampering ties of luxury and tradition,
    Possessions, loyalties and hobby-horses?
    Cast all these overboard, and Faith is left,
    Faith potent through its prayer to miracles,
    Whether in name of Jesus or Jim Crow.
    Prayer: Rachel seems to think the collects prayer,
    And Mother Superior, I make no doubt,
    Will teach her scores of neatly turned devotions
    Couched in diminutives and pastoral terms,
    (Lord, how I hate the _literary_ prayer),
    Little white lambs indeed—O baa baa black sheep
    Have you any wool?—And Rachel in return
    Flushing with shame impetuously confesses,
    And holds half back, but crafty eyes are watching
    To drag all out, so Rachel has to tell
    How on the river bank one morning early
    The water was so clear, the sun so warm,
    She kissed me suddenly and was kissed by me—
    Lip kisses, that was all, and fingers clasped.
    Mother Superior then demanding further
    Will cross-examine her on how and why.
    “To tell it now will mortify the passion,
    Then when you make your general confession
    To Father James, your mind will have found peace.”
    (A good excuse) “What then were your sensations,
    The physical joy, tell me, my erring lamb!
    Tell me, I beg, but as the sin was pleasant
    So must confession of the sin be pain....”

    “Tis pity she’s a whore”. Rachel told all.
    _Whore_, traitress to the secret rites of love,
    Publisher of the not-communicable.
    If she refused the vows? If her heart changed?
    Rachel and I? This meek ex-novice rifled
    Of her love-secrets? medals and images
    Sewn in her skirts, Birmingham images
    From the totem-factory, niched in her heart?
    No, Love is fusion of Prayer, and prayer must be
    The flash of faith, unformulated words
    Demanding an accomplishment of Love
    With noise of thunder, against circumstance,
    And Rachel forfeits there all power to love.

    Who’s this? For now the rabble have passed through,
    Going unnoticed out; Mother Superior
    Secretly with one finger at her lips,
    Re-enters, carefully locks my bedroom door,
    Now she disrobes with fingers trembling so
    They tear the fastenings—naked she steps out
    To practise with her long-past-bearing body
    The wiles of the Earthbound (Ah, the fine young man,
    The hot young man whose kisses tasted sweet
    To our new postulant!) Madam, I beg you!
    You have mistaken the room; no, next door sleeps
    A lusty bagman, he’s the man to embrace you
    And welcome you with every brisk refinement
    Of passion. But while _you_ rumple his sheets,
    The innocent and unhappy eyes of Rachel
    Bewilder me—Oh then in spite of Faith
    I am cast down—You nuns, but if I needed,
    As I no longer need, I’d challenge you
    To contest of hard praying, one against all.
    I could wrest Rachel back even to this bed
    To-night. But Faith, and Prayer that’s born of Faith
    Find her slow mind impediment to their power,
    So I resign her—Agatha, do your worst.

    The wisest course of Love? Yes, maidenhead.
    For me? Love’s Sacrifice? It was not love.
    The Broken Heart? Not mine. I’ll say no more
    Than mere _goodbye_. Go, get you to your nunnery,
    And out the candle! Darkness absolute
    Surrounds me, sleepy mother of good children
    Who drowse and drowse and cry not for the sun,
    Content and wisest of their generation.




EPILOGUE.


    The morning star, over the mountains peering,
    Spoke to him not too distant for his hearing:—

    _I am the star of morning poised between_
    _The dead night and the coming of the sun,_
    _Yet neither relic of the dark nor pointing_
    _The angry day to come. My virtue is_
    _My own, a mild light, a relief a pity_
    _And the remembering ancient tribe of birds_
    _Sing blithest at my showing; only Man_
    _Sleeps on and stirs rebellious in his sleep._
    _Lucifer, Lucifer am I, millstone-crushed_
    _Between conflicting powers of doubleness,_
    _By envious Night lost in her myriad more_
    _Counterfeit glints, in day-time quite overwhelmed_
    _By tyrant blazing of the warrior sun._
    _Yet some, my prophets who at midnight held me_
    _Fixedly framed in their observant glass,_
    _By daylight also, sinking well shafts deep_
    _For water and for coolness of pure thought_
    _Gaze up and far above them see me shining_
    _Me, single natured, without gender, one_
    _The only spark of Godhead unresolved._

    But the lover gave no heed, so through his dreams
    Marched back the rabble rout, they glowered upon him
    But grown more awful and more reverend,
    Poor things before, now garbed in ancient dress,
    Bearded patriarchs and angry sybils
    Levites with censers, chariot riding kings,
    With comminations of hell fire and plague.
    Then even Nehushtan, the snake finger-post,
    Nehushtan which the credulous Hezekiah
    Spurned for superstitious, would have eased him,
    Or the bellowing voice of Aaron’s molten calf.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FEATHER BED***


******* This file should be named 59742-0.txt or 59742-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/9/7/4/59742


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

